about/index.md, before:

---
layout: about
---
I started programming in 2008 to create programs to help people manage their MapleStory private servers. I got interested in video game exploitation and helped create Bizarro Trainer for (what was) w8baby.com along with some other game automation tools. In 2011, I worked at Northrop Grumman for a few years where I worked on projects involving or related to: data analysis, penetration testing, virtualization and DevOps. I also worked for the Web Services department of the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs, and I also worked as a TA for our Software Engineering course. In 2015, I joined a startup in Denver, CO named [Josh.ai](https://www.josh.ai) where we're bringing you a natural voice interface for controlling your smart home devices. I've helped with all parts of our stack, including our embedded software product, our cloud infrastructure, and our mobile development. I've done everything from crawling under the floor to wire server racks all the way up the stack to working on websites. I believe software should be robust, reliable, and exhibit high performance. These days I enjoy learning about machine learning, distributed systems, and cloud backends/infrastructures.

If you want more details, I encourage you to read my [full story](http://stackoverflow.com/story/aaronbatilo) or checkout my [linkedin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/abatilo).

Thanks.

Commit message:

Added statement about undergrad research

about/index.md, after:

---
layout: about
---
I started programming in 2008 to create programs to help people manage their MapleStory private servers. I got interested in video game exploitation and helped create Bizarro Trainer for (what was) w8baby.com along with some other game automation tools. In 2011, I worked at Northrop Grumman for a few years where I worked on projects involving or related to: data analysis, penetration testing, virtualization and DevOps. I also worked for the Web Services department of the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs, and I also worked as a TA for our Software Engineering course. During this time I picked up an interest in machine learning and did undergraduate research with Dr. Jugal Kalita studying coreference resolution. In 2015, I joined a startup in Denver, CO named [Josh.ai](https://www.josh.ai) where we're bringing you a natural voice interface for controlling your smart home devices. I've helped with all parts of our stack, including our embedded software product, our cloud infrastructure, and our mobile development. I've done everything from crawling under the floor to wire server racks all the way up the stack to working on websites. I believe software should be robust, reliable, and exhibit high performance. These days I enjoy learning about machine learning, distributed systems, and cloud backends/infrastructures.

If you want more details, I encourage you to read my [full story](http://stackoverflow.com/story/aaronbatilo) or checkout my [linkedin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/abatilo).

Thanks.
