---
layout: post
title: Programming careers without a college degree
categories: [Blog]
---
I've been asked before whether or not I think my lack of a college degree has hindered
me in my career. The answer is a little complicated because I almost have a degree, even
if I don't advertise it like that.

I have 128 out of 132 credits required for graduating with a Bachelor of Science in
Computer Science degree from the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs. I failed
Calculus 3 in my very last semester, and moved away from Colorado Springs assuming that
I'd have slid past with a D for that class. I received all of the other major education
and experience from being a Computer Science major. I had college internship experience
while I was a student as well. I didn't go right from high school to being a full time
employee. That being said, after being in industry for a few years, I've developed a few
strong opinions on this subject.

I don't put my college education on my resume. If you looked at [my
resume](https://www.aaronbatilo.dev/resume), you'll notice that there isn't the
traditional education section. I don't list my major, I don't list my GPA, and I don't
list any "relevant coursework" or anything like that. I've been asked many times before
whether or not I went to college. Some people get confused by the fact that I was a
student web developer and have TA experience, even though I don't list any formal
education. I usually keep it really simple and respond with something like: "I was a CS
major, but never completed the degree." Some people might say that it's better to put
the fact that I went to college, even if I didn't complete the degree. I'm told that it
shows that I tried and that it's a good sign. I actually beg to differ these days.

You see, I have a pretty ruthless opinion of the job hunting process and what a resume
represents. I like to take interviews for fun. I think it's an unfair advantage that a
hiring manager/company will interview dozens if not hundreds of people, but then the
majority of job seekers will only go into the job hunting process when they actually
need a job. They become rusty, uncomfortable, and can more easily get taken advantage of
in the negotiation process if they're desperately looking for a change. By interviewing
always, I get to become comfortable, and I keep my own leverage since I'm still happy
with the job when I do these interviews. Because of this habit, I've interviewed with a
lot of places and have talked to a lot of recruiters.

I want to plug the book [The Effective Engineer](http://www.effectiveengineer.com/)
because I think it's one of the books that has really transformed the way that I view
myself. When you are a value focused engineer, the world really opens up to you. You get
put on more important projects, you get thanked by more people, etc.

The reason I bring this all up is because finding a job is all about presenting your
value. This is true whether you're a college dropout, a bootcamp graduate, or a Stanford
PhD alumni. When you're hunting for a new job, it is **your** job to figure out how best
to explain to other people what kind of value you'll bring to their team.

It starts with your resume. Your resume is (or rather, should be) a 1-2 page document
that's full of examples of ways you've brought value to previous companies. I think most
people tend to write their resumes with the thought process of listing out the things
that they've done. I firmly believe that a list of what you've done is a side effect of
writing a value first resume, and this mindset has done very well for me in the past.
Your resume should be full of as much quantitative data in it as you can muster. It's
not just that you "Improved X", but it's that you "Improved X by Y%". It's not just that
you "Reduced deployment time" but rather "Reduced deployment time from days to minutes".
Your resume is the gateway into explaining to a potential employer what it will mean for
them to hire you.

Remember, employment is a business transaction first and foremost. The company is paying
you some salary with the assumption and expectations that you will directly contribute
to either saving them or making them more money than you cost. If they didn't have that
expectations, then the company would undoubtedly go out of business. That's just how
business works. So now you need to figure out how to convince a company that you will do
that for them.

Things like a college diploma really just helps set a baseline idea for the company. If
you have a college degree and nothing else on your resume, then the company can
understand that you're capable enough to finish a degree, and the confidence that a
company can have in your abilities is entirely based off of how rigorous that college
program was. This is the underlying reason why students from prestigious schools are
highly valued. They had to get through some more well known hardships to get their
degree, relative to someone who might have just gone to a state school or community
college. The minimum bar of effort and capability that Harvard requires of you to get a
degree is much different than your local community college.

And now you ask, how does this translate to finding a job? It's all really just about
figuring out how you can give an employer confidence that you're going to help meet
their expectations. Hiring is really hard and a very expensive process. The more
confidence you give them the better, and the more confidence you give them, the better
your leverage is for negotiating. If you can convince a company that they **need** you,
then you'll be able ask for more money. And a lot of the time, you can ask for more
money than they budgeted for, because you've now given them so much confidence that
you'll help them save/make money, that they're willing to put in that much more in the
initial investment.

When you write your resume, just remember to do it from the perspective that you're
trying to give whoever is reading it, confidence that you're capable. If you don't have
a college degree, you make up for this by doing portfolio/personal project work and
explain why your projects are examples of how you'll bring value. For example, maybe
you've launched a classic TODO app, and you're interested in SRE/DevOps work. Then your
bullets about this TODO app should have very little to do with actual code/framework
choices, but instead talk about how you brought value to yourself by learning to deploy
this application through various different ways. This gives the employer confidence that
you're flexible and well-versed in multiple technologies and all of their advantages and
disadvantages.

Be value first, and having a degree, bootcamp certificate, or anything else doesn't
matter as much. The hardest job is always going to be the first one because you're
trying to use just your personal projects as your talking points, but as you go from job
to job, your list of value delivery points will grow as long as you're paying attention
to what you're spending your time on.
