---
layout: post
title: Reviewing 2018
---
I actually went an entire year without writing a single blog post, so that's a little embarassing. The year of 2018 was significantly more eventful than I ever would have thought possible. Let's recap a little. When I wrote my blog post for 2017, it was the end of December. I had been at FullContact for about 6 months, but a storm was brewing. In early December, I started talking to a recruiter for a company named Conga. Let's call her Lindsay... mostly because her name is actually Lindsay. I was actually fairly happy at FC, but there was something that didn't sit well with me. People in sales were getting let go pretty much left and right. It was the same with people in customer success. In hindsight, I've learned that sales people not hitting their numbers, and then being let go, is actually a very normal thing. I wasn't used to it at the time, and so that made me really worried. I felt significantly inferior to a lot of my co-workers, so that made me think that I was going to be let go fairly soon. Because of this, and the combined fact that Lindsay had a truly delightful and personalized message to me in LinkedIn, I replied and started the interview process with Conga.

You may recall that in 2017, I learned that I enjoy the interview process a lot, but I hadn't been interviewing since I joined FC. I was too busy trying to catch up to my peers. Anyways, I had my initial phone screen with Lindsay, and I was told that they're trying to build a data/machine learning team from the ground up. I'm a data nerd and really enjoy machine learning and specifically natural language processing, so I was intrigued. I continued the interview and then spoke with the VP of Engineering on the phone. That conversation went well and I was invited to do an on-site interview with Ade and Jordan. Jordan was one of the most tenured and senior engineers at Conga, and Ade was a fairly recent hire, but has a ridiculously impressive background in his own right. The two of them were the ML team at the time, and so they were deciding whether or not I'd be a good fit to join them. For the interview, I was asked to bring in a code sample/project that I could demonstrate. I brought in [summarybox](https://www.github.com/abatilo/summarybox). Summarybox is a project that I started with the intention of being able to do abstract and generative summarization, but the project has pretty much ended with being keyword extraction. Either way, I was able to talk a lot about the project and both the ML tradeoffs and the engineering tradeoffs that I made with it. Jordan had some really good questions about my usage of word2vec, and Ade was particularly interested in some of the design decisions that I made in terms of execution performance.

I was told that I was going to be made an offer shortly after the on-site, and this is where everything started getting really crazy for me. By this point, my manager at FC had assuaged any wild ideas that I had about being fired. He helped me understand the lifecycle of sales people in a SaaS company, and I was back to being really excited about working at FC. I was taking the train everyday, which I loved because I could listen to podcasts or read for a nice dedicated chunk of my day. Because I was so happy, when the offer came from Conga, I politely declined and told them that even though the salary was compelling, the nature of building an ML team from the ground up meant that there was a lot of work to do, and I was really happy to just keep learning from everyone at FC. One thing happened after another, and the salary being offered ended up becoming much higher than anything I had expected going into the job interview. I had a lot of internal conflict, but I ended up accepting the job offer. Within the same week, I found out that one of my absolute favorite peers was leaving to join Google. Him and I were scheduled to work together on a few projects, but with him leaving, I was less (albeit a very miniscule difference) excited to be working at FC.

I left FC, and joined Conga without taking any time between jobs. In some ways, I regret that, but in other ways, I didn't mind it. When I got to Conga, I had learned that Jordan was now working on other things, and I was working with Ade and another hire, Roland. My initial objectives were to get acclimated to the code that Ade and Jordan had written. I reported to Ade, and I was really excited about this, because him and I share a lot of views on software engineering. I'd learn over the next few months how much more true that really is. We both loved tooling, and making the development experience as seamless as possible. In fact, there was a time where he was at Microsoft and was leading what is known as the Patterns and Practices group. That group was trying to instill best practices to Microsoft, and so Ade had a great amount of experience and some really wonderful opinions. I remember that one of my earliest tasks was when I pitched to Ade to help automate more of our deployment, and to turn our deployment configuration into infrastructure as code. Conga claimed to believe in DevOps, but they were really just calling their old school operations team, DevOps. When I started, there was no CI/CD server, deployments were (and still mostly are) handled entirely by hand. Ade had a different vision for his team, though. He wanted the ML team to be the pinnacle of best practices, and to be the reference team for how other teams should strive to be. I was totally into that. We had the best static analysis, best linters, and best code coverage of any team in the company. It helped a lot that Ade's boss, James Newkirk, perhaps best known for [creating xUnit](https://jamesnewkirk.typepad.com/posts/2007/09/announcing-xuni.html) was also the lead of Microsoft's P&P group at a different time.

Over the next few months, I'd continue to improve our code base, a little at a time. I'd automate a little bit more of the code base or build process, and I was working on building out the initial foundation of the ML platform at Conga. You see, I was hired specifically for being a software engineer first, and being a machine learning practitioner second. My team mate, Roland, was the inverse. He was to research with some text processing methodologies, and I was there to help make sure that they scaled and could be deployed smoothly. Our team was formed with the intention of empowering Conga's existing products with ML features. In April of 2017, Conga announced the acquisition of a company, Counselytics. They were a platform for analyzing legal documents and extracting pertinent information out of the documents, all automatically. Counselytics came with 3 engineers who would get rolled into my team.

Over even more of the next few months, leading into July of 2017, we kept building out our platform, and I was pleasantly surprised when Ade had me promoted to becoming a senior software engineer. In all honesty, I thought that it made sense and I was happy about that. Ade was giving me a nice amount of autonomy, and I was able to make some very important and influential decisions about our technology stack, and the trust was really encouraging and motivating. In this same time frame, a peer of mine from FC came to join Conga, to help level up the DevOps culture at Conga.

From July, and leading into October, I was happily heads down in my work, delivering cool software and learning plenty of new technology. I've become pretty darn proficient with Amazon Web Services, and know quite a bit about Apache Spark now. I was using things like AWS EMR, AWS Batch, and part of our stack was even all AWS Lambda based, so I got to build up my experience in the entire serverless movement. My peer from FC setup Kubernetes at Conga, and my team became the first consumers of Kubernetes at the company, and we were the first team to really leverage Docker containers. We were living up to Ade's desire of being on the cutting edge of all of the best possible development and engineering practices.

In October, a lot changed all at once. James Newkirk announced his resignation, and Ade announced his shortly after. When this happened, I was both nominated and requested to take over the entire ML team. At Age 24, I became an engineering manager for the Conga ML team. This became a (without trying to sound over dramatic) dark time for me. For 10 years, I had been writing code for large fractions of my waking time. I wasn't sure how to handle being a manager. My output was no longer measured from myself, and that really messed with me. On top of that, (and now without me trying to sound too cocky) I was the person producing the most output on my team. You can measure this with the JIRA stories that I completed, or just looked at the various features of our tech stack and processing pipeline. The majority of it was coming from me. I started reporting to someone else now, and it was this time that I was really unsure about my future at Conga. The cherry on top was that now the ML team was being expected not to empower existing Conga products, but to launch an entirely new product, user interface and everything. In January of 2018, I was a data engineer working on an ML platform to be consumed internally. By October, I was an engineering manager working to bring a product to market. My job and life had changed quite a bit.

From October up until now, it's been quite a lot of ups and downs. I've had some fairly frustrating lows, but I've also had some personally historic highs. My new manager, Regina, she's great. She's not technical like Ade was, but she's really great about being transparent with me and listening when I'm frustrated. She's been really patient, as has Ryan, the VP of Engineering that I mentioned earlier. If they weren't so patient with me, I don't think I'd have stayed at Conga until now. I'm really grateful for them and all of the opportunity and trust they've been giving me.

Over this year, I've learned so much. I'm really happy with all that. I've stopped using an alarm clock. Now I just sleep and let my body's natural circadian rhythym wake me up. I've rekindled a friendship that I really enjoy. We weren't speaking because we disagreed on how best he could approach the job search, but now we're friends again and actually, he starts at Conga on January 2, 2019. He won't be on my team but he'll be in the same office as me. I've learned so much about web development this year. I'm actually a truly lethal React developer now. Even if I don't want to be, I can plow through some UI code. I've learned Go at a much deeper level than in 2017. I don't have any significant projects with Go, but I've read a book on Go. That's another point, I've read a lot of books this year. I've actually learned that I'm **really** good at consuming non-fiction books. If I need to learn something, I'll go buy a book on it and I'll read the book cover to cover and I retain so much more of the information than I ever thought. It's a really funny contrast to how much effort I spent in trying to avoid reading fictional books in school. I've picked up Python as a primary language, and I'm pretty dangerous with Python as well. I understand a lot about Python3 and the cpython runtime. I even have 2 different Python libraries that are OSS and publically available. I have [sanic-swagger](https://pypi.org/project/sanic-swagger/0.0.4/) and [typed-json-dataclass](https://github.com/abatilo/typed-json-dataclass). Neither project is hugely popular and I don't spent that much time on them, but it's cool to know that these libraries can be downloaded and used by anyone. I learned a lot about the differences between parallelism and concurrency, and man, am I pretty good with async/await both in Python3 and in React. I learned Scala this year, to write Apache Spark code. I've switched to an entirely terminal based development workflow. I use neovim and tmux, and a collection of other command line tools like ripgrep and jq.

Looking at last year's blog post, I realize that I didn't set up any explicit goals for 2018. I'm always trying to create a lifestyle business, and unfortunately, 2018 was still not the year for that to happen. I want to set some high level goals for 2019 and make them really clear, so that I can come back to them at the end of 2019 and see how well I did.

In no particular order:
- [ ] Reboot ColoradoGeekJobs using what I've learned about web development
- [ ] Write a non-trivial (as in, not just a tutorial) application in either Clojure or ClojureScript
- [ ] Write a non-trivial (as in, not just a tutorial) application in either Erlang, Haskell, or Elixir? I want more experience in a purely functional language. I still don't understand it as much as I think I should
- [ ] One of these non-trivial applications can/should be a pseudo clone of the LaunchDarkly product. I'm not trying to compete with them, but I really like what they do
- [ ] Write at least 4 other blog posts for 2019. One for each quarter of the year. Not necessarily an overview of the quarter, but 4 good blog posts seems like a nice goal
- [ ] Go back to being an individual contributor. Management might be good for me one day, but I'm just not done being an IC
- [ ] Standup and administrate my own Kubernetes cluster, even if it's just using EKS/GKE/etc
- [ ] Release some "product" that has end to end functionality. That means user sign up and login. I don't even need any users, but it's just another (incremental) step towards having a lifestyle business
- [ ] Read 30 non-fiction books. I read 15 last year, and I didn't discover my book reading super power until the second half of the year. If I can read 30 books, I'd be really happy.
- [ ] Pending it's completion, one of those books should be Crafting Interpreters by Bob Nystrom. I just like learning about programming languages
- [ ] Get promoted beyond senior software engineer. Getting promotions for back to back years is a stretch but that doesn't mean I can't make it a goal.
- [ ] Break 1100 hours of development time. I had 1094 hours in 2018. I'd like more of my time, day to day, being spent on the act of writing code.
- [ ] Spend more time with my wife and dog. This is a non-technical goal, but I've learned that my mental health contributes a lot towards my capabilities as a developer. A clear and happy mind help me write better code
- [ ] Lose weight. Ideally I'd be somewhere in the 170-180 lbs range. I'm closing in on 200 lbs and I need to take better care of myself
- [ ] Lower my resting heart rate. It's a little too high for my tastes. I'm still in the normal range, but toward the higher end of the spectrum
- [ ] Write consistently, every day, in my personal/private journal
- [ ] Get Elite status with at least 1 character in Smash Ultimate. As of right now, I'm really liking Chrom and Lucina.
- [ ] Finish every game in the Kingdom Hearts series
- [ ] Stretch goal will be to reach blue status on TopCoder. I actually really enjoy competitive programming but I don't seem to make enough time for it, so I'm extremely bad. Maybe this is the year that I focus on it.

I'm sure I'll come up with more goals during the year, but I'll be curious to see how those get prioritized, relative to some of these goals that I'm making now.
