_drafts/why-i-left-josh.md, before:

---
layout: post
title: Why I left Josh.ai -- A self interview
---

First, let's go over a quick timeline of how I spent my time at Josh.ai

I joined in June 2015 as an intern working full time, up until August 2015 when I had to go back to school. During this time, I worked with Python in a production setting for the very first time. I learned about the Flask framework, and connected that to a PostgreSQL database. I'd used SQL databases before, but I had never used PostgreSQL specifically. All of this was put on Heroku and all of my work went into this project.

When the semester came about, up until January of 2016, I continued on Flask/full-stack development but I was doing it at reduced hours. At this point most of my work involved developing the personality of our chat bot system using a domain specific language which was built. I would also build internal tools to help us with reporting and automation of other processes.

In February of 2016, I was repurposed to help work on our Android application. At the time, we had a full time iOS developer, but the Android developer was a part time contractor. So I was working with him in order to get more of the Android work caught up and done. This lasted until May of 2016, aka the end of the semester and when I finished at school.

May 2016 -> January 2017
- Android developer
- RxJava/RxAndroid, reactive programming
- Espresso
- CI/CD
- WebSocket
- Custom UIs
- Dagger2/DI
- Compile time annotations
- JSON patch
- Android OS
- Point of most growth

February 2017 -> Present
- C++ developer
- Working on device control
- Helping our NLP
- Music control
- Information retrieval
- LAN

What do I want?
I want to become the best programmer that I can become.

What does it mean to be a good programmer? Why aren't you one now?
A good programmer is someone who can methodically break down problems that can be solved with computer software, and write the software that solves those problems. A good programmer is someone that can look at the big picture but zoom in when needed. They have an understanding of solving a problem that serves a purpose. The best programmers that I know always have some form of specialty. John Carmack has basically spent his entire life working on graphics. Very high performance simulations, etc. Jonathan Blow has spent almost his entire life working on video games. They all get intimately familiar with a specific domain and spend their life drilling down into that field. I'm not sure at this point if you have to specialize to be a good programmer. But I think you need to specialize to become one of the best programmers. There's too much to know, too much to learn, for you to become the best at all of them. No matter how hard you try. I would actually consider myself a good programmer, but I'm not a good enough programmer.

What are you missing to become a good enough programmer?
I want to be the best. I need to grow and I want to find my field to grow into.

What fields have you considered?
For a long time I thought that would be in security, but I was wrong. Computer security has offensive and defensive parts to it. The defensive parts are boring, and the offensive parts are controversial. Both are really difficult. I think if I had to choose, I would pick to be an offensive cyber security specialist. The problem with that, is that being a penetration tester doesn't give me the same amount of development that I'd like. As a pen tester, you'd largely be using tools that are vetted. You might write your own but that's certainly more rare. Writing malware isn't really much of a career either, unless it was state sponsored. However, I don't think I'd like to have a career in that environment/field. That leaves you to defensive security. Maybe I could work at an anti-virus company, or be a malware researcher. I definitely don't want tot be a malware researcher. There's forms of research that I would like, but not this one. It all becomes too political for my tastes. Same with anti-virus companies. Viruses are strange to deal with and analyze. It's interesting work, and I want to learn more, but I don't want it as my day to day job.

Then for a while I thought that would be in game development. Games are a wonerful creative outlet that lots of people get to enjoy. When you work on a game, you're likely using an engine to do the development, and writing code using a scripting language like Lua. I've enjoyed my fair share of video game playing, but gameplay development doesn't feel like what I want to do either. I've made an Android game and thinking about balance, or thinking about achievement, these are fun, so that's a plus. But the gameplay development and testing quickly became boring. I would have much rather been a person working on developing the engine. The tool that makes the games run at 60fps, the tool that everyone uses to make the games. Your code has to be fast, it has to be robust, etc. The problem I found with this is that I'm really lacking in the skills for this type of development. You need to be good with graphics. You need to know about hardware. And actually, I'd be intersted in teaching myself these things, but ultimately, game development studios and the industry in general are known for hard crunch times and poor pay. I understand that it works out for the people who are truly passionate about it. I can't say that I'm so driven to work in the games industry to make those compromises. Games, again, seem like something I'd really do for fun.
Then I thought maybe I could specialize in mobile development. Mobile development is fun. You're working in a limited resource environment which provides for a fun challenge. Mobile apps and platforms have changed the way the world works. It's incredible. The problem I have with mobile development is that the ideas for apps largely seem very trivial. Of course there are a few companies where this is not the case. Many times, mobile apps are just mobile versions of a web interface. Sometimes they're a game. The problems that an app developer might face aren't really ones that entice me. As an app developer, I've had to figure out why my UI looked different on a phone with a different resolution. Sometimes I've had to figure out why the garbage collector wasn't getting rid of certain references, but that's not specific to app development. Mobile development is cool though in that almost anyone can go and download your app to try it. Ultimately though, the problems you face with that aren't what I'd want to spend my time doing.


What else have you done?
I've had to do full stack development, and some embedded like C++ development. Getting really good at C++ development is nice for doing the graphics in game engine development. My mind likes having to understand the intricacies of writing C++ code where you have to do a lot of things for yourself. Not a lot is taken care of for you. I use vim as my development environment too because I don't always like an IDE to do everything for me.

What do you want to learn?

Commit message:

Starting to talk about full time work

_drafts/why-i-left-josh.md, after:

---
layout: post
title: Why I left Josh.ai -- A self interview
---

First, let's go over a quick timeline of how I spent my time at Josh.ai

I joined in June 2015 as an intern working full time, up until August 2015 when I had to go back to school. During this time, I worked with Python in a production setting for the very first time. I learned about the Flask framework, and connected that to a PostgreSQL database. I'd used SQL databases before, but I had never used PostgreSQL specifically. All of this was put on Heroku and all of my work went into this project.

When the semester came about, up until January of 2016, I continued on Flask/full-stack development but I was doing it at reduced hours. At this point most of my work involved developing the personality of our chat bot system using a domain specific language which was built. I would also build internal tools to help us with reporting and automation of other processes.

In February of 2016, I was repurposed to help work on our Android application. At the time, we had a full time iOS developer, but the Android developer was a part time contractor. So I was working with him in order to get more of the Android work caught up and done. This lasted until May of 2016, aka the end of the semester and when I finished at school.

Fast forward to school finishing in the middle of May of 2016 and I become the only full time Android developer. This is where things start to really rocket.

May 2016 -> January 2017
- Android developer
- RxJava/RxAndroid, reactive programming
- Espresso
- CI/CD
- WebSocket
- Custom UIs
- Dagger2/DI
- Compile time annotations
- JSON patch
- Android OS
- Point of most growth

February 2017 -> Present
- C++ developer
- Working on device control
- Helping our NLP
- Music control
- Information retrieval
- LAN

What do I want?
I want to become the best programmer that I can become.

What does it mean to be a good programmer? Why aren't you one now?
A good programmer is someone who can methodically break down problems that can be solved with computer software, and write the software that solves those problems. A good programmer is someone that can look at the big picture but zoom in when needed. They have an understanding of solving a problem that serves a purpose. The best programmers that I know always have some form of specialty. John Carmack has basically spent his entire life working on graphics. Very high performance simulations, etc. Jonathan Blow has spent almost his entire life working on video games. They all get intimately familiar with a specific domain and spend their life drilling down into that field. I'm not sure at this point if you have to specialize to be a good programmer. But I think you need to specialize to become one of the best programmers. There's too much to know, too much to learn, for you to become the best at all of them. No matter how hard you try. I would actually consider myself a good programmer, but I'm not a good enough programmer.

What are you missing to become a good enough programmer?
I want to be the best. I need to grow and I want to find my field to grow into.

What fields have you considered?
For a long time I thought that would be in security, but I was wrong. Computer security has offensive and defensive parts to it. The defensive parts are boring, and the offensive parts are controversial. Both are really difficult. I think if I had to choose, I would pick to be an offensive cyber security specialist. The problem with that, is that being a penetration tester doesn't give me the same amount of development that I'd like. As a pen tester, you'd largely be using tools that are vetted. You might write your own but that's certainly more rare. Writing malware isn't really much of a career either, unless it was state sponsored. However, I don't think I'd like to have a career in that environment/field. That leaves you to defensive security. Maybe I could work at an anti-virus company, or be a malware researcher. I definitely don't want tot be a malware researcher. There's forms of research that I would like, but not this one. It all becomes too political for my tastes. Same with anti-virus companies. Viruses are strange to deal with and analyze. It's interesting work, and I want to learn more, but I don't want it as my day to day job.

Then for a while I thought that would be in game development. Games are a wonerful creative outlet that lots of people get to enjoy. When you work on a game, you're likely using an engine to do the development, and writing code using a scripting language like Lua. I've enjoyed my fair share of video game playing, but gameplay development doesn't feel like what I want to do either. I've made an Android game and thinking about balance, or thinking about achievement, these are fun, so that's a plus. But the gameplay development and testing quickly became boring. I would have much rather been a person working on developing the engine. The tool that makes the games run at 60fps, the tool that everyone uses to make the games. Your code has to be fast, it has to be robust, etc. The problem I found with this is that I'm really lacking in the skills for this type of development. You need to be good with graphics. You need to know about hardware. And actually, I'd be intersted in teaching myself these things, but ultimately, game development studios and the industry in general are known for hard crunch times and poor pay. I understand that it works out for the people who are truly passionate about it. I can't say that I'm so driven to work in the games industry to make those compromises. Games, again, seem like something I'd really do for fun.
Then I thought maybe I could specialize in mobile development. Mobile development is fun. You're working in a limited resource environment which provides for a fun challenge. Mobile apps and platforms have changed the way the world works. It's incredible. The problem I have with mobile development is that the ideas for apps largely seem very trivial. Of course there are a few companies where this is not the case. Many times, mobile apps are just mobile versions of a web interface. Sometimes they're a game. The problems that an app developer might face aren't really ones that entice me. As an app developer, I've had to figure out why my UI looked different on a phone with a different resolution. Sometimes I've had to figure out why the garbage collector wasn't getting rid of certain references, but that's not specific to app development. Mobile development is cool though in that almost anyone can go and download your app to try it. Ultimately though, the problems you face with that aren't what I'd want to spend my time doing.


What else have you done?
I've had to do full stack development, and some embedded like C++ development. Getting really good at C++ development is nice for doing the graphics in game engine development. My mind likes having to understand the intricacies of writing C++ code where you have to do a lot of things for yourself. Not a lot is taken care of for you. I use vim as my development environment too because I don't always like an IDE to do everything for me.

What do you want to learn?
