---
layout: post
title: What I've learned last month: April 2017
---
Normally I only start writing if I feel like I've learned something substantial. I want to try something new where I stock pile things that I've learned and write about everything I've learned. I think doing things this way will help me remember everything that I've learned. A lot of topics or tips I might write about are almost undoubtedly things that I already know, or rather, should know. It'll be interesting to see what kinds of lessons I'm learning over and over again. It's a lot more concrete of a way for me to remember or see what problems I tend to have and need to work on.

# Be defensive
I learned that you should never assume that any input you ever get is valid. The moment you receive input is the same moment that you become susceptible to all kinds of nonsense. In the worst case, maybe you're dealing with security exploits. You might get malformed data and parse it the wrong way which causes an exception which might cause a crash of your program. Many people don't like to be verbose in their validity checking code because it makes the code ugly and expands it heavily. Some people are working on contexts where you think that the system has been designed in a way that you shouldn't need to worry about your inputs. Defensive programming is really important when building production/client facing systems. Inputs from your user can come in forms that you don't expect. If you are working with some external API service, the API might change things up on you without telling you. Some APIs will politely inform you of deprecation. Some APIs will just straight up change things without ever bothering to tell you. Program defensively and do so with a lot of confidence. There's nothing that sounds more like laziness than when a system goes down and the answer to why it went down is, "because I never expected that input". I know, this is easier said than done, but you can make very basic assumptions that go a long way in defensive practice. For example, always check for null, if you're in a weakly typed language, check the type of the data you get. If you're ever going to access or index something concrete, always check for it's existence first. Some programming languages make this nicer or easier to do, but you should do it always no matter what.

Along with that first tip. You should have a system setup for receiving crash alerts and or sending yourself logs. There's an insane number of systems out there that already do this or make it really easy. For example, I've used [Crashlytics](https://try.crashlytics.com/) for various Android projects. I've heard of [RollBar](https://rollbar.com/) from a podcast, and I've also heard of [papertrail](https://papertrailapp.com/) from podcasts. There's a lot of these, but you should make it really easy to get yourself information. I've listened to several different podcasts that featured the author of [The Art of Monitoring](https://www.artofmonitoring.com/), but I have yet to read the book myself. The conversations in the podcasts are always really interesting though so I think the book would have really promising tips. I definitely have it on my reading list. 

# Functionality first
I went overboard with writing things defensively for something and it added a lot of extra code which would get abstracted into a method call later on anyways. It made no sense for me to be explicitly writing all the error checking over and over again when I knew I would be gutting it all. When you're building a new feature, the only metric that ever matters is that it works correctly and is functional. Write the working code first. Best practice only matters after it works.

# Write your abstractions iteratively
